hey everyone welcome to Iceland I'm here
with the BBC earth lab team and our
sister channel BBC Earth and plugs Matt
is here making a bunch of films we
really really really when we came out on
this trip we wanted to see the Northern
Lights the aurora borealis and look I
mean I I cannot even begin to tell you
how spectacular this is over on earth
unplugs are making a film all about the
mythology behind the Northern Lights
it's really hard to speak because
genuinely we've just ran out of the car
and this is just blowing both of our
brains and I'm going to tell you all
about the science of this and also
something I've discovered recently which
is a potentially deadly sides to kind of
all this as well yes please and let's
just let's just enjoy this for a second
[Music]
[Applause]
this absolutely immense light show is
breathtakingly beautiful but before we
talk about its dangerous site we need to
explain how the Aurora are created and
it's all thanks to interaction of two
things that we wouldn't normally see the
solar wind and the magneto sphere and
the story begins at the Sun around the
surface of the Sun lies the corona an
aura of plasma that extends millions of
kilometers into space and reaches
temperatures of more than a million
degrees Celsius that at that heat the
contents of the corona are extremely
energetic that even the sun's huge
gravitational pull can't hang on to all
of it meaning particles and plasma are
constantly escaping out into space in
all directions and this is what we know
as the solar wind and those particles
and plasma are moving fast around 500
kilometres per second
so they take just three and a half days
to travel the 150 million kilometres
from the Sun to the earth and for
comparison if we drive that distance at
motorway speeds it would take you 153
years so yeah pretty fast what does the
solar wind reaches the earth it
encounters our planet's magnetosphere
now that is the Earth's magnetic field
generated deep in the swirling liquid
iron of the outer core and it extends
out many tens of thousands of kilometers
above the Earth's surface it's this
magnetic field that makes our compass
needles point north where we can
conveniently see the amazing aurora but
it also serves a much more important
purpose protecting the planet from that
rushing scalding solar wind by directing
the charged particles down the magnetic
field lines towards the poles and it's
when they reach the atmosphere that
things get really exciting always
actually calm down for a bit the solar
particles collide with the molecules of
gas in our atmosphere transferring a lot
of energy that's enough to excite the
electrons in the oxygen and nitrogen in
the air as those electrons calm down as
it were they release that energy as
photons of light that we see in the
Aurora
the different colors in the Northern
Lights come from solar material
interacting with different atoms in the
atmosphere we've seen a lot of green
tonight Green comes from oxygen blue and
purple from nitrogen and red from a
combination of both but these beautiful
curtains of light may one day be the
hallmark of a deadly danger on an
11-year cycle the Sun is periodically
more active with more sun spots
appearing on the surface and a greater
possibility of coronal mass ejections
these are basically huge plumes of solar
gas exploding out from the Sun surface
accelerating a billion tons of matter up
to several million miles an hour if the
normal solar wind is like a gentle
breeze then a big coronal mass ejection
it's like a hurricane force Gale that
just comes firing down unhindered to the
Earth's surface and in the face of such
an onslaught the magnetosphere meets its
match the resulting geomagnetic storm
would see immense and glorious Aurora's
stretching as far as the tropics but
that's just a small silver lining
compared to the accompanying potentially
catastrophic risk the intense radiation
from the Sun poses the most threat to
astronauts spacecraft and satellites
that aren't protected by the Earth's
atmosphere where it can fry electronics
and damage DNA and down on earth these
charged solar particles can cause havoc
to the electrical grid creating
high-voltage power surges that can blow
out
transformers they can create large-scale
blackouts and risk of fire as components
short-circuit the largest coronal mass
ejection in recorded history was in 1859
we had far less reliance on electronics
and spaceborne systems apparently
Northern Lights was seen as far south as
Cuba and Honolulu and telegraph
operators experienced sparks coming from
their equipment but if we were subjected
to a geomagnetic storm of that scale
today our high-tech infrastructure would
grind to a halt no mobile phones no GPS
no radio TV maybe no electricity at all
with these pillars
modern society torn down who knows what
chaos might happen as we struggle to
adapt to the digital blackout and it's
not just us
technological humans that would suffer
the effects either several animal
species like pigeons and turtles and
whales consents the Earth's magnetic
field and they rely on it to navigate
sentencing north just like we can sense
the direction of a sound but when a
coronal mass ejection batters the
magnetosphere it sends those field lines
all arrive
leaving those animals lost and confused
scientists have linked high instances of
whale beachings to periods of high solar
activity which produce geomagnetic
storms and make these migrating Giants
lose their sense of direction see in the
Northern Lights tonight was just
once-in-a-lifetime absolutely beautiful
I feel so so so lucky to have seen this
cosmic phenomena with my own eyes but
with an insight into the processes that
caused them I'm certainly gonna be
thinking of them as a silent an eerie
warning of how fragile our existence is
and how much really we owe to our
magnetosphere so thank you swirling
molten iron core ve'lo and if you like
the idea of witnessing one of the
world's most amazing celestial
phenomenon then listen up we are
launching the BBC Earth presenter search
2018 an amazing opportunity for a brand
new presenter to join the BBC earth
family if you're passionate about
science and you want to find a way to
share that passion with people all over
the world then watch this video to find
out more check out more of our videos
from incredible iceland here and of
course make sure you subscribe to BBC
earth lab oh and hit that notification
bell because then you will be one of the
first to hear about one of our new
videos and don't forget that Maddy's got
all your myths and legends are all about
the Northern Lights over on BBC earth
unplugged